Formal modeling is the process
of precisely specifying
statistical models for your data, and
for providing a rigorous framework for
challenging and testing those models.
So, at this point you've done a lot
of exploratory data analysis, and
you probably have a reasonable sketch of
the solution that you're looking for for
your question.
But you may not be so sure about whether
that solution will hold up to kind
of challenges or will be sensitive to the
little changes in the data or the model.
And so, formal modeling is the process
of kind of specifying your
model very precisely so that you know
what you're trying to estimate, and
you know how you can challenge your
findings in a rigorous framework.
And so, usually the way that
we write down these models
is with mathematical notation or
with computer codes so
that we can get very specific
about what we're trying to do.
Using just words alone
to describe a model,
so that's why we usually have to resort
to mathematics or computer code.
Now, when we talk about formal models,
very often we'll talk about parameters,
and parameters play an important
role in statistical modelling.
Parameters usually represent
characteristics of the population.
They might describe relationships
between variables or certain features
like means or standard deviations, and
because they are characteristics of
the population they're generally
considered to be unknown.
So, we have to estimate
them from the data and
often the goal of an analysis Is to
estimate given types of parameters.
And the nice thing about formal
modeling is that it allows you to
specify which types of parameters you're
interested in and are trying to estimate.
So for example, in a linear regression,
the coefficients of the linear
regression models are parameters.
And very often your goal
is to estimate them.
So, the general framework for doing formal
modeling is very similar to kind of what
we've been talking about
all along in this course.
The three basic steps are setting
expectations, collecting information,
and then revising those
expectations based on what you see.
So for setting expectations, typically
you want to have a primary model,
which is your best sense of
what the solution should be and
what is the answer to your question.
This is the leading candidate based on
all the current information you have and
based on any kind of exploratory
analysis that you've done.
Now it's not necessarily going
to be the final model, it's
going to be the model that you start with
to kind of structure your formal analysis.
You may update it later based on
any information that you collect,
and you may change your primary
model to be something different.
So that's okay, and so you don't
have to worry too much about kind of
what your primary model is
going to be from the get-go.
Just pick one that seems reasonable
from the data, and provides a, kind of,
sensible solution.
And then you'll be testing it
in various different ways,
just to see if it's going to work.
So the next stage is
collecting information.
So given that you have a primary model,
you want to develop a series of what I
call secondary models to test and
challenge your solution.
So the basic idea of
a secondary model is that it's
slightly different from
your primary model.
It may add variables,
it may subtract variables and
you may add different functional forms.
So it looks kind of like your primary
model but it has variations to it.
Those are all the secondary
models that you want to look at.
And the goal is to generate evidence
against your primary model.
Okay, so if you can generate evidence
that suggest that your primary model is
incorrect.
Then you can kinda update your thinking,
and try to come up with
a different primary model.
Another word for
this is sensitivity analysis.
So you wanna think about how
sensitive your primary model is to
various changes that are introduced
via the secondary models.
So we'll talk a little bit more
specifically about what this means
when we talk about our examples okay?
The last step of course is
revising your expectations.
And so if the secondary models are largely
consistent with your primary model and
exactly what consistent means depends
on the context and your application and
the question that you are asking.
And then that's great and you can
either move on to the next phase or
maybe you're finished and
you can just kind of record your results.
However, if your secondary models
successfully challenge your primary model
and maybe put some of your
initial conclusions in doubt,
then you may need to adjust or
modify the primary model to better reflect
all this additional evidence that you've
generated via all the secondary models.
And then you can start the process
again with a new primary model, and
then perhaps a new set of secondary
models to challenge that primary model.
And then you can iterate through this
process until you arrive at a model that
you think reasonably
summarizes your data and
answers the question that
you were looking to ask.
So there's two basic types of situations
In which we often use formal modeling.
And I'm going to categorize them into
what I call Associational Analyses and
Prediction Analyses.
So Associational Analyses, there the aim
is to look at the association between
two or maybe more features while
in the presence of many other potentially
confounding factors, okay And so for
the most part we're interested in looking
at the association between two things, but
there may be other things that we have
to adjust for, or account for, and
that we want to make sure
we're accounting for properly.
So there's three classes of variables
in an associational type of analysis.
The first is the outcome.
The outcome is the factor or
the feature that we think varies along
with what I call a key predictor.
Now, it may not actually respond to
the key predictor in a causal sense,
but the idea is that when
the key predictor changes,
the outcome changes along with it,
whether it is causal or not.
So the next type class of variable
is what I call the key predictor.
And this is usually the predictor
of interest that we wanna know,
how does it vary?
How does the outcome vary
with the key predictor?
There may be one, or two, or
even three key predictors that
you're primarily interested in.
But usually the number will be small, and
very often the number
is actually just one.
And so the key predictor explains
some variation in the outcome and
it's something that you're interested in.
The last set is a very
large class of variables,
is all the potential confounders.
So these are things that tend to be, they
are associated with your key predictor and
they're also associated
with their outcome.
And they generally serve to kinda confuse
the association between your key predictor
and your outcome.
So these are things that often may need
to be accounted for in some way or
included in a formal model to properly
examine the relationship between
your key predictor and your outcome.
The next set of analyses that you
might do is a prediction analysis.
So a prediction analysis differs from
an associational type of analysis,
because the goal here is to really to
use all available information to predict
an outcome, okay?
So you usually don't care
about the mechanism, or
how things work when you're trying
to do a prediction analysis.
So you don't necessarily care about
explaining how a variable can predict
a given outcome.
You just want to be able to generate
a good prediction from a set of variables
and you're not developing some detailed
understanding of the relationships
between all the features okay.
Now for most prediction analysis this
really isn't a distinction between
the key predictor and
a bunch of other potential confounders.
Usually all predictors
are considered equally cuz
they may contribute information
to predicting the outcome.
And before we do the analysis,
we may not weight them any differently,
we may weight them all equally.
Because we don't have any a priori
information about might more or
less important.
Now any good prediction algorithm,
will help you to determine which variables
are useful for
predicting the outcome and which aren't.
And so they will help you sort that out.
Another feature of prediction analyses
is that, usually the model that you use
cannot be written down in
a convenient mathematical notation.
Often, the only way that the procedure can
be specified, is through computer code, or
through some algorithm.
And so,
often there's no parameters of interest.
So, you're not trying to
estimate any parameters.
You're just trying to make a prediction
using any combination of features,
using an functional form
of any type of model.
So that's kind of hallmark
of prediction analysis.
And finally, most prediction analysis
often are what you might call
classification problems, so the outcome
is really something that takes two
different values and you're trying to
predict one of those two different values.
So that's the kind of summary of
what formal modeling is used for and
in what context is may be used.
Whether it's associational or
prediction types of analyses.
In the next lectures I'll give examples of
associational and prediction analysis and
how the formal modeling framework can
be used to work through these different
kinds of analyses.